Expression form basics (#5545)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: docs/design/values.md

|    to **reference** | direct init + materialize | ==        | materialize        |
| to **initializing** | direct init               | copy init | ==                 |

Reference expressions are divided into 2x2 sub-categories: they can be either
[_ephemeral_](#ephemeral-reference-expressions) or
[_durable_](#durable-reference-expressions), and either _owning_ or
_non-owning_.

Ephemeral reference expressions are formed through temporary materialization,
and have restrictions on how they are used. In contrast, durable reference
expressions refer to storage that has a declared name. Owning reference
expressions can only refer to complete objects, whereas non-owning reference

> expressions can refer to both complete objects and sub-objects. As a

Reviewer: Is the object converted to a base class considered a sub-object?

Author: Yes.

|    to **reference** | direct init + materialize | ==        | materialize        |
| to **initializing** | direct init               | copy init | ==                 |

Reference expressions are divided into 2x2 sub-categories: they can be either
[_ephemeral_](#ephemeral-reference-expressions) or
[_durable_](#durable-reference-expressions), and either _owning_ or
_non-owning_.

Ephemeral reference expressions are formed through temporary materialization,
and have restrictions on how they are used. In contrast, durable reference
expressions refer to storage that outlives the expression, and typically has a
declared name. Owning reference expressions can only refer to complete objects,
whereas non-owning reference expressions can refer to both complete objects and

> sub-objects (such as class fields and base class sub-objects). As a consequence,

Reviewer 2: I assume that given a pointer `p`, the expression `*p` has to be treated as non-owning. Is that OK and intended? Presumably we'll want to be able to move from such things.

I think it's fine to say this is future work; this additional division of reference expression categories seems to be a bit of a side-quest for this PR already :)

Author: Ouch, that's a good point, and that's going to be tricky to resolve. So yes, leaving that as future work sounds good.

And yeah, adding support for destructuring-into-`var`s turned out to be pretty separable from the rest of the design, but I wasn't sure of that until I'd gone through the exercise of adding it.

only owning reference expressions can be destructively moved.

Value binding and copy initialization can be applied to any reference
expression, but materialization only produces owning ephemeral reference
expressions. An owning reference expression can be implicitly converted to
non-owning; this has no run-time effect because it merely discards static
ownership information. Non-owning reference expressions can only be converted to
owning reference expressions by round-tripping through copy-initialization and
materialization. Non-durable-reference expressions cannot be implicitly
converted to durable reference expressions at all.

> **TODO:** Determine how these reference sub-categories relate to memory-safety

> > properties like uniqueness.

Reviewer 2: Would be good to run the nomenclature here past the folks working on the safety story, so if nothing else they know they need to update it if they want to give a different meaning to "owning".

Author: After talking to them, I think the term "owning" risks causing confusion. I'm currently leaning toward calling these "total references" -- what do you think?

Author: After some Discord discussion, I've changed it to "entire".

|    to **reference** | direct init + materialize | ==        | materialize        |
| to **initializing** | direct init               | copy init | ==                 |

Reference expressions are divided into 2x2 sub-categories: they can be either
[_ephemeral_](#ephemeral-reference-expressions) or
[_durable_](#durable-reference-expressions), and either _entire_ or
_non-entire_.

Ephemeral reference expressions are formed through temporary materialization,
and have restrictions on how they are used. In contrast, durable reference
expressions refer to storage that outlives the expression, and typically has a
declared name. Entire reference expressions can only refer to complete objects,
whereas non-entire reference expressions can refer to both complete objects and
sub-objects (such as class fields and base class sub-objects). As a consequence,

> only entire reference expressions can be destructively moved.

Reviewer 3: Is it necessary to introduce "destructive move" here?

The words "destructive move" can be interpreted in various ways:
- as a relocation that leaves the source location in a bad state, but also:
- a relocation where a (possibly user-defined) destroy operation may run.

The tricky part is that both scenarios might be useful.  For example, when relocating a `Box` (which we think of as Carbon's equivalent std::unique_ptr) to a new location, one would want the inner pointer is copied around, but we would not deallocate memory behind the inner ptr.
During that move, we need to be talking about two Box object, the source and the target. After the move, the source location is unusable (MaybeUnformed), so we don't need to clear the pointer. The point is that we don't want run a destroy operation, if that destroy operation involves releasing memory.

When the lifetime of a Box object ends (not during relocation), then we'd certainly want to release the memory allocation that comes with the inner pointer. And alignment with C++ requires the ability to call a (possibly user-defined) destroy operation.

(Maybe there is a discussion about what destruction means in Carbon that I'm not aware of, and it is also possible that Box may be a special case, but I doubt it).

A different problem is that an entire object may not be relocatable at all, for example, if it contains fields that have a values pointers into the object itself (called "self-referential objects" in Rust discussions, where they are prevented by the type system).

Finally, we may permit "moving out" of a field of an object in some cases, which leaves the field but also all containing objects unusable. For safety, this requires having a lot of knowledge about the containing objects, e.g. that nothing outside the current scope can reach them and/or that their lifetime will end or they will be reinitialized.

Author: We don't have an adopted proposal for destructive move yet, but prior discussions have largely settled the broad outlines: destructive move is a operation that ends the lifetime of the source object, meaning that it no longer needs to be destroyed, and evaluates to an initializing expression of the same type (which should initialize its target to the previous value of the source object). It may either leave the source object in a state where the destructor must not be run, or in a state where the destructor can be run but doesn't have to be run, depending on which interface the type chooses to implement. It will probably be spelled `~` (e.g. `~x` destructively moves from `x`).

> A different problem is that an entire object may not be relocatable at all, for example, if it contains fields that have a values pointers into the object itself (called "self-referential objects" in Rust discussions, where they are prevented by the type system).

This sentence isn't intended to say that entire references can _always_ be destructively moved; only that non-entire references _can't_ be destructively moved.

> Finally, we may permit "moving out" of a field of an object in some cases, which leaves the field but also all containing objects unusable. For safety, this requires having a lot of knowledge about the containing objects, e.g. that nothing outside the current scope can reach them and/or that their lifetime will end or they will be reinitialized.

This doesn't just leave the containing objects unusable, it potentially leaves them in a state where their destructors can't be run, but where their other subobjects' destructors must be run. I think of that as a kind of "destructive destructuring", which ends the lifetime of the containing object without ending the lifetimes of its fields. This proposal allows that, but the containing object must be a struct or tuple (we could probably allow class types to opt into it, but that's future work), and it must be accessed via an ephemeral entire reference.

That second restriction isn't as onerous as it might seem, because you can turn a durable reference into an ephemeral reference by moving it. So for example if `x` is a durable entire reference to a tuple or struct, you can't do `~(x.f)`, but you can do `(~x).f`, and/or do this:
```
var {f: auto, _} = ~x;
~f;
```

In other words, if the enclosing object isn't a temporary, the code must explicitly mark the end of its lifetime before moving any of its fields.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the explanations.

> **Future work:** This means that pointer-dereference expressions are
> non-entire, but we will presumably want to be able to destructively move from
> them. We need to figure out how to support that without violating the
> invariant that a live object has live fields.

Value binding and copy initialization can be applied to any reference
expression, but materialization only produces ephemeral entire reference
expressions. An entire reference expression can be implicitly converted to
non-entire; this has no run-time effect because it merely discards static
object-completeness information. Non-entire reference expressions can only be
converted to entire reference expressions by round-tripping through
copy-initialization and materialization. Non-durable-reference expressions
cannot be implicitly converted to durable reference expressions at all.

> **TODO:** Determine how these reference sub-categories relate to memory-safety

> > properties like uniqueness.

Reviewer 4: FWIW, "entire" doesn't work _great_ for me, but it's not terrible. Mostly, I think it'll make more sense to revisit the names in the context of memory safety. Unsure whether it makes sense to capture that in this TODO or not...

Author: Yeah, I don't love "entire" either. It can't hurt to add something to the TODO. Done.

|    to **reference** | direct init + materialize | ==        | materialize           |
| to **initializing** | direct init               | copy init | ==                    |

Reference expressions are divided into 2x2 sub-categories: they can be either
[_ephemeral_](#ephemeral-reference-expressions) or
[_durable_](#durable-reference-expressions), and either _entire_ or
_non-entire_.

Ephemeral reference expressions are formed through temporary materialization,
and have restrictions on how they are used. In contrast, durable reference
expressions refer to storage that outlives the expression, and typically has a
declared name. Entire reference expressions can only refer to complete objects,
whereas non-entire reference expressions can refer to both complete objects and
sub-objects (such as class fields and base class sub-objects). As a consequence,
only entire reference expressions can be destructively moved.

> **Future work:** This means that pointer-dereference expressions are
> non-entire, but we will presumably want to be able to destructively move from
> them. We need to figure out how to support that without violating the
> invariant that a live object has live fields.

> Value binding and copy initialization can be applied to any reference

Reviewer 5: I think this is a typo; it should say "value acquisition"?

Author: Whoops, yes, this PR predates the "value binding" -> "value acquisition" terminology shift, and I never updated it. Sent #6754 to fix it.

|    to **reference** | direct init + materialize | ==        | materialize        |
| to **initializing** | direct init               | copy init | ==                 |

Reference expressions are divided into 2x2 sub-categories: they can be either
[_ephemeral_](#ephemeral-reference-expressions) or
[_durable_](#durable-reference-expressions), and either _owning_ or
_non-owning_.

Ephemeral reference expressions are formed through temporary materialization,
and have restrictions on how they are used. In contrast, durable reference
expressions refer to storage that outlives the expression, and typically has a
declared name. Owning reference expressions can only refer to complete objects,
whereas non-owning reference expressions can refer to both complete objects and

> sub-objects. As a consequence, only owning reference expressions can be

Reviewer: Perhaps explicitly say "sub-objects" includes a base object

complete.

Any context that accepts a reference expression can accept an owning reference
expression, and unless otherwise specified it can accept non-owning references
as well. Unless otherwise specified, an expression or operation that produces a
reference produces a non-owning reference.

Currently, the only context that requires an owning reference is the scrutinee
of a `var` pattern, which must be an owning ephemeral reference.

There is only one kind of explicit expression that produces an owning reference:
the name of an object introduced with a
[variable binding pattern](pattern_matching.md#name-binding-patterns) (in other
words, a name that was declared with `var <name> : <type>`) is an owning durable
reference.

Two kinds of implicit expression can also produce owning references:

-   The result of materialization is an owning ephemeral reference.
-   When a [tuple pattern](pattern_matching.md#tuple-patterns) or
    [struct pattern](pattern_matching.md#struct-patterns) is matched with an
    owning ephemeral reference scrutinee, that scrutinee is destructured into
    owning ephemeral references to its elements, which are then matched with the

>     corresponding subpatterns.

Reviewer 2: I think conversions between adapters and conversions that only change qualifiers ("compatible conversions", that preserve the representation) should also produce an owning reference when given an owning reference.

Author: I agree, but I don't think it's specific to owning references: it seems like primitive-form compatible conversions should always have the same category as the input. I've added that to the discussion of type conversions below. Do you think I should also list that here, and in all the discussions of the other categories? All else being equal I'd prefer to avoid the duplication, and that kind of pass-through behavior doesn't seem like it's "producing" an owning reference in the way that these other expressions are.

Reviewer 2: I think avoiding the duplication is reasonable, but if that's what we want then I think we should not try to provide an exhaustive list here, since it seems that will lead to duplication. Maybe we could rephrase these lists as being examples of expressions with the given category, and keep the primary description of the categories of the expressions in the design document that describes the expression form itself? As it stands, this reads to me as if there are no other syntactic forms of expression that can be ephemeral / entire other than the ones listed, which I think doesn't reflect the intent.

Author: I'm happy to treat these lists as non-exhaustive examples, but @chandlerc do you have any concerns with it? IIRC you're the one who originally set these up as exhaustive lists.

Author: Chandler confirmed verbally that he has no concerns, so I've done this. Note that I also fixed a couple small bugs I noticed in the process.

### Durable reference expressions

_Durable reference expressions_ are those where the object's storage outlives
the full expression and the address could be meaningfully propagated out of it
as well.

There are four contexts that require a durable reference expression in Carbon:

-   [Assignment statements](/docs/design/assignment.md) require the
    left-hand-side of the `=` to be a durable reference. This stronger
    requirement is enforced before the expression is rewritten to dispatch into
    the `Carbon.Assign.Op` interface method.
-   [Address-of expressions](#pointer-syntax) require their operand to be a
    durable reference and compute the address of the referenced object.
-   [non-`self` `ref` binding patterns](pattern_matching.md#name-binding-patterns)

>     require their scrutinee to be a durable reference.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   [`ref` binding patterns](pattern_matching.md#name-binding-patterns)
    require their scrutinee to be a durable reference.
```
The main proposal says the permission for `self ref` to bind to an ephemeral reference is being removed.

read or written and the object's address can be taken.

Reference expressions can be either _durable_ or _ephemeral_. These refine the
_lifetime_ of the underlying storage and provide safety restrictions reflecting
that lifetime. Reference expressions can also be either _owning_ or
_non-owning_, depending on whether the referenced object is known to be complete
(rather than a sub-object of another object).

### Owning reference expressions

An _owning reference expression_ is one that is statically known to refer to a
complete object. Other references are _non-owning_. Durable and ephemeral
reference expressions can both be either owning or non-owning. An owning
reference can be implicitly converted to a non-owning reference (with the same
durability), because this merely discards the knowledge that the object is
complete.

Any context that accepts a reference expression can accept an owning reference
expression, and unless otherwise specified it can accept non-owning references
as well. Unless otherwise specified, an expression or operation that produces a
reference produces a non-owning reference.

Currently, the only context that requires an owning reference is the scrutinee

> of a `var` pattern, which must be an owning ephemeral reference.

Reviewer: `partial C` \-\> `C` conversion will also? Maybe that will be left for #5389 ?

Author: Hmmm; requiring an owning ephemeral reference is more relaxed than requiring an initializing expression. I think that relaxation is safe for the input of `partial C` -> `C`, but I'm not completely sure, and it seems unlikely to be useful in practice, so it's probably safer for that to require an initializing expression.

Keep in mind, by only requiring an owning ephemeral reference, you give up the ability to choose the storage location -- you just get a reference to an already-materialized object, which you take ownership of. The only situation I know of where we need to fix an object's storage location without making it durable is "destructive destructuring", so accepting an owning ephemeral reference lets you accept objects that used to be sub-objects of a struct or tuple temporary. For example:
```
fn F() -> (X, Y);
let (var x: X, var y: Y) = F();
```
Here the result of `F()` is materialized as a temporary, then the temporary is destructively destructured into owning ephemeral references, which are "adopted" by `x` and `y`.

In principle I could imagine a function that returns a primitive-form initializing tuple or struct with a `partial C` element, but I can't see how it would ever be useful to do so, given that you couldn't use it to initialize a derived class object.

_non-entire_, depending on whether the referenced object is known to be complete
(rather than a sub-object of another object).

### Entire reference expressions

An _entire reference expression_ is one that is statically known to refer to a
complete object. Other references are _non-entire_. Durable and ephemeral
reference expressions can both be either entire or non-entire (although
non-entire ephemeral references are rare). Unless otherwise specified, an
expression or operation that produces a reference produces a non-entire
reference.

Note that a non-entire reference expression still _might_ refer to a complete
object; the language rules just don't _guarantee_ that is does. As a result, an
entire reference can be implicitly converted to a non-entire reference (with the
same durability), because this merely discards the knowledge that the object is
complete. By the same token, there is no context that requires a non-entire
reference; only contexts that accept both, that accept only entire references,
or that don't accept references at all.

Currently, the only context that requires an entire reference is the scrutinee

> of a `var` pattern, which must be an entire ephemeral reference.

Reviewer 2: What do you think of:
```suggestion
of a `var` pattern, which is converted to an entire ephemeral reference.
```
to make it clearer that a non-entire (or non-ephemeral) reference (or a non-reference) is copied rather than rejected?

Author: I've been trying to avoid that style of description because it could suggest to the reader that the rules about what conversions (if any) are applied to an expression can depend arbitrarily on its usage context (e.g. some other context might require its operand to be an entire reference, prior to any category conversions, or might even apply different category conversion rules). How about this instead?

that will not outlive the full expression. Because the storage is only
temporary, we impose restrictions on where these reference expressions can be
used: their address can only be taken implicitly as part of a method call whose
`self` parameter is marked with the `ref` specifier.

> **Future work:** The current design does not support mutating ephemeral
> references (or initializing expressions): assigning to an ephemeral reference
> is disallowed directly, and invoking mutating methods is disallowed because
> the `ref self` parameter can only bind to a durable reference. In C++ it's
> unusual but not rare to intentionally mutate a temporary, such as in a
> builder-style method chain (for example `MakeFoo().SetBar().AddBaz()`), so
> Carbon will need to provide some interop and migration target for that kind of
> code.

There is one context that requires an owning ephemeral reference expression in
Carbon: the scrutinee of a
[`var` pattern](#binding-patterns-and-local-variables-with-let-and-var). There

> is no context that requires a non-owning ephemeral reference expression.

Reviewer 2: I think we can say something stronger: requiring a non-owning reference wouldn't even really make sense. "Non-owning" is not a property of the expression so much as it's the *absence* of a property, given that it means "we don't know for sure statically that it's owning", so anything that accepts a non-owning reference should also accept an owning reference.

Author: That's a good point, but I think it's more applicable further up, so I've spelled this out there. Here I was trying to rule out something that makes sense in principle but just happens to not exist at the moment: a context which requires an ephemeral reference but doesn't require it to be owning. I've rephrased to try to make that clearer.

expression's type. This obligation can be fulfilled by allocating suitable
storage and materializing the initializing outcome into it, or it can be
delegated by returning it to some enclosing context, where it acts as an
initializing expression.

The holder of the initializing outcome must fulfill that obligation exactly
once, and if it is nested within a larger composite outcome (see
[below](#form-conversions)), the computation that fulfills the obligation must
be independent of any values or references in the enclosing complete outcome,
and free of other side-effects. These requirements are enforced during
typechecking. This ensures that the storage location can actually be computed
beforehand, and passed as an input to evaluation of the initializing expression.

> **Future work:** At present these requirements are somewhat trivial because an
> initializing outcome is always fulfilled immediately, but a forthcoming
> proposal is expected to introduce a way to bind a name to an initializing
> outcome. That proposal may impose stricter requirements than the ones
> described here, which are just the minimum necessary for initializing outcomes

> > to be coherent.

Reviewer: As far as I can tell, you are referring to `let x:? auto = F();`. In the case `F()` returns an initializing expression, `x` becomes a `var`. I don't think #5389 will introduce a way to bind a name to an initializing outcome.

Author: What about this?

> `~i` allows you to forward the initializing expression used to initialize `i` when `i` is a `var` parameter.

That sounds to me like `i` is bound to an initializing outcome, not a variable.

Reviewer: Okay. Now that #5389 is out for review, perhaps you could suggest how it should be changed?

Author: OK, I left a suggestion on #5389 for rephrasing that sentence, and I've revised this section to focus on initializing outcomes as a specification convenience.

**Future work:** The design should be expanded to fully cover how copying is
managed and linked to from here.

> There are no contexts in Carbon that always require an initializing expression,

Reviewer: partial T -> T conversion requires (or is about to require) an initializing expression. In general, the forms generic proposal allows operator interfaces to be sensitive to whether its arguments are initializing.

Author: > partial T -> T conversion requires (or is about to require) an initializing expression. In general, the forms generic proposal allows operator interfaces to be sensitive to whether its arguments are initializing.

I've rephrased this to try to clarify that I'm talking about _syntactic_ contexts (to parallel the discussion of durable and ephemeral references on lines 313 and 367). Neither of these is a syntactic context, as far as I can tell.

More fundamentally, owning ephemeral reference expressions are intended to take the place of initializing expressions as operation inputs. Most notably, `var` patterns (including `var` parameters) now expect the scrutinee to be an owning ephemeral reference, not an initializing expression. So I think the partial T -> T conversion should require the input to be an owning ephemeral reference expression, just as if it were defined as a function with a `var` parameter. Similarly, I think we shouldn't allow operator interfaces to be sensitive to the difference between an initializing expression and an owning ephemeral reference expression.

The motivation for this change is to efficiently support use cases like this:
```
fn F() -> (X, Y);
let (var x: X, var y: Y) = F();
```
We couldn't support that in the old model because an initializing expression can't be efficiently decomposed into two separate initializing expressions -- we have to materialize `F()` up front, and then decompose it into separate reference expressions (which must be owning because `var` only matches complete objects, and must be ephemeral so that `let (ref x: X, ref y: Y) = F();` doesn't compile).

and no expression syntax that always produces an initializing expression. By
default, function call expressions are initializing expressions, and
correspondingly the operand of `return` is required to be an initializing
expression, but this default can be overridden by the
[function signature](#function-calls-and-returns).

> The other case that requires forming an initializing expression in Carbon is

Reviewer: Does this contradict the thesis of the previous paragraph?

Author: My phrasing was awkward. Is this better?

to act as its output, and as the referent of the resulting ephemeral reference
expression.

### Initializing outcomes

An _initializing outcome_ is the notional result of evaluating an initializing
expression, and represents an obligation to provide storage for an object of the
expression's type. This obligation can be fulfilled by allocating suitable
storage and materializing the initializing outcome into it, or it can be
delegated by returning it to some enclosing context, where it acts as an
initializing expression.

This delegation only happens in a few local contexts whose semantics are defined
by the core language, such as forming a tuple or struct literal from its
elements, or [converting between composite forms](#form-conversions), where the
generated code can compute the storage location beforehand, and use it as a
hidden output parameter when evaluating the initializing expression. The
initializing outcome abstracts away that hidden output parameter and lets us use
the conventional vocabulary of expression evaluation, where information flows
into an operation from its operands and not the other way around.

### Function calls and returns

> The outcome of a function call can have an almost arbitrary form. The return

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [outcome](#expression-forms) of a function call can have an almost arbitrary form. The return
```

expression, and represents an obligation to provide storage for an object of the
expression's type. This obligation can be fulfilled by allocating suitable
storage and materializing the initializing outcome into it, or it can be
delegated by returning it to some enclosing context, where it acts as an
initializing expression.

This delegation only happens in a few local contexts whose semantics are defined
by the core language, such as forming a tuple or struct literal from its
elements, or [converting between composite forms](#form-conversions), where the
generated code can compute the storage location beforehand, and use it as a
hidden output parameter when evaluating the initializing expression. The
initializing outcome abstracts away that hidden output parameter and lets us use
the conventional vocabulary of expression evaluation, where information flows
into an operation from its operands and not the other way around.

### Function calls and returns

Function calls can have almost arbitrary forms. The return clause of a function
signature consists of `->` followed by a _return form_, an expression-like
syntax that specifies not only the type but also the form of calls to the

> function. `return` expressions in the function body are expected to have that

Reviewer: I feel this is a bit more confusing than it needs to be since it is conflating a function call with the result of the function call.

Author: How's this?

I'd avoided talking about "outcomes" because those aren't defined until later, but "forms" aren't defined until later either, so if I'm using one I might as well use both.

The `<return-expression>` in the `return` statement actually initializes the
storage provided for `x`. There is no "copy" or other step.

In the body of such a function, all `return` statement expressions are required
to be initializing expressions and in fact initialize the storage provided to
the function's call expression. This in turn causes the property to hold
_transitively_ across an arbitrary number of function calls and returns. The
storage is forwarded at each stage and initialized exactly once.

Note that functions without a specified return type work exactly the same as
functions with a `()` return type for the purpose of expression categories.

> More generally, the syntax following `->` in a function declaration is actually

Reviewer: This is a return-specific syntax, not the same as form literals as described in the upcoming form generics proposal

forms of the corresponding fields of the struct literal.

The _type component_ of a form is defined as follows:

-   The type component of a primitive form `[T, C, P, V]` is `T`.
-   The type component of a tuple form is a tuple of the type components of its
    elements.
-   The type component of a struct form is a struct whose field names are the
    field names of the struct form and whose field types are the type components
    of the corresponding elements.

The type of an expression is the type component of the expression's form.

Almost all operations expect their expression operands to have a primitive form
with a particular expression category, and possibly a particular phase and/or
type. When an expression is used in such an operand position, it is implicitly
converted to the expected type, if a suitable conversion is available. Note that
this conversion takes place even if the expression already has the expected
type, because the conversion can still change the expression's form. If the
result of the conversion has a composite form, it is converted to the expected
type again (this second conversion is guaranteed to exist, and have a primitive

> form). Finally, category and phase conversions are applied as needed to satisfy

Reviewer 2: Can you explain what's going on here -- how can the conversion produce a composite form the first time?

My expectation was that the expected category (if any) would be part of the input to the conversion process, along with the expected type (if any), and the conversion process would produce a value with an acceptable type and category (or fail). That's roughly how conversion works in the toolchain at the moment -- it takes (effectively, more or less) [a set of acceptable expression categories and a target type as input](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/8428b86cfba95ba68bb8570044c3db23cbca9f2f/toolchain/check/convert.h#L16), with the target type [set to the type of the input](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/8428b86cfba95ba68bb8570044c3db23cbca9f2f/toolchain/check/convert.cpp#L1433) in the case where the caller doesn't care about the type and only wants to constrain the category.

Author: > Can you explain what's going on here -- how can the conversion produce a composite form the first time?

As I understand it, we expect implicit conversions to be re-specified in terms of forms and form-generics, in a way that allows the `impl` to specify the form of the conversion result. For example:

```
impl form(ref Foo) as ImplicitAsPrimitive((i32, i32)) where .ResultForm = form(ref i32, ref i32);
```

So if a reference expression of type `Foo` is used where an `(i32, i32)` is expected, the first conversion (i.e. the first invocation of `ImplicitAsPrimitive.Convert`) will have a non-primitive form `(ref i32, ref i32)`. In order to get to a primitive form, we convert the result to `(i32, i32)`. We can ensure that second conversion has a primitive result form (presumably `var (i32, i32)`), because only the prelude can define `impl form(ref i32, ref i32) as ImplicitAsPrimitive((i32, i32))`.

> My expectation was that the expected category (if any) would be part of the input to the conversion process, along with the expected type (if any), and the conversion process would produce a value with an acceptable type and category (or fail). That's roughly how conversion works in the toolchain at the moment -- it takes (effectively, more or less) [a set of acceptable expression categories and a target type as input](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/8428b86cfba95ba68bb8570044c3db23cbca9f2f/toolchain/check/convert.h#L16), with the target type [set to the type of the input](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/8428b86cfba95ba68bb8570044c3db23cbca9f2f/toolchain/check/convert.cpp#L1433) in the case where the caller doesn't care about the type and only wants to constrain the category.

I think that all corresponds to what I'm trying to say here, so can you be more specific about where you see a disconnect? The only difference I see is that you're focusing on the inputs to the form conversion algorithm, but I'm also trying to specify the algorithm itself (at a high level).

Reviewer 2: I think the difference is that I would not expect the final adjustment from `form(ref i32, ref i32)` to `form(var(i32, i32))` to be found by `impl` lookup nor performed by doing the whole conversion process again, but instead to be done by built-in logic as the final step of the conversion process -- and that, unlike `impl` lookup for `ImplicitAsPrimitive`, the built-in form conversion's behavior would depend on the desired result form.

I don't think the final form conversion can be done by converting an expression to its own type, because I'd expect the `impl` in the prelude to be

```carbon
final impl forall [F:! Form] F as ImplicitAsPrimitive(F.type) where .ResultForm = F {
  fn Convert[self:? Self]() ->? Self = "identity";
}
```

That is, I'd expect that converting an expression to its own type should be a no-op, not a conversion to a primitive form.

Author: OK, I'm trying a different approach now.

[`returned var` declarations](control_flow/return.md#returned-var). These
directly observe the storage provided for initialization of a function's return.

### Expression forms

We typically treat the category and type of an expression as independent
properties. However, in some cases they can become entangled, and we need deal

> with them as an integrated whole. The _form_ of an expression captures all of

Reviewer: I think it is more about capturing all of them rather than them being particularly entangled.

Author: How's this?

whereas forms are the types of expressions and patterns.

A _primitive form_ consists of a type, an expression category, an expression
phase, and optionally a constant value (which is present if and only if the
expression phase is not "runtime"). When dealing with primitive forms, which is
the common case, we can treat each of those properties as independent. For
convenience, in this section we will use the notation `[T, C, P, V]` to
represent a primitive form with type `T`, category `C`, phase `P` and value `V`,
but this is not Carbon syntax.

Other forms are called _composite forms_, and there are two kinds:

A _tuple form_ can be thought of as a tuple of forms, just as a tuple type can
be thought of as a tuple of types. The form of a tuple literal is a tuple form,
whose elements are the forms of the literal elements.

> **TODO:** Extend this to support variadic forms.

A _struct form_ can be thought of as a struct whose fields are forms, just as a
struct type can be thought of as a struct whose fields are types. The form of a
struct literal is a struct form with the same field names, whose values are the
forms of the corresponding fields of the struct literal.

> An expression with a composite form still has a well-defined type, phase, and

Reviewer: I don't see why phase has to be consistent across a composite form. It may also be a bit misleading to say the composite form has a type. There is a type it will use if you do something like `let x: auto =`..., but that is the type after a conversion from a form, rather than the type of the form itself.

Author: > I don't see why phase has to be consistent across a composite form.

It doesn't have to be consistent; the phase of an expression with composite form is the "least runtime" of the phases of its primitive sub-forms (i.e. the most precise phase that subsumes the phases of its primitive sub-forms). I had a draft where I spelled that out, along with the recursive definitions of an expression's type and constant value; do you think I should add that back in?

> I don't see why phase has to be consistent across a composite form. It may also be a bit misleading to say the composite form has a type. There is a type it will use if you do something like `let x: auto =`..., but that is the type after a conversion from a form, rather than the type of the form itself.

Can you be more specific about how it's misleading?

If it's misleading to talk about the type of an expression with a composite form, how is "progressive disclosure" going to work? I don't think it's going to be feasible to stop our documentation from talking about expressions as though they always have types.

Reviewer: I think it is confusing to say that the composite form has a phase since member access into it can give you something with a different phase. There is the phase it will convert to if it is converted to a primitive form, but that seems well addressed by "The phases of all primitive sub-forms are converted to a single common phase" in "Form semantics" below.

The case for types is more ambiguous, since the conversion to a primitive form preserves the types of the components. I don't think we should be talking about the type of composite forms, though, only primitive forms -- I think the type of the composite form is only relevant if it gets converted to a primitive form. An example of my concerns is that adding `as` _\<its type\>_ changes it.

Author: Per the consensus of the [05-29 open discussion](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Yt-i5AmF76LSvD4TrWRIAE_92kii6j5yFiW-S7ahzlg/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.dj0nqhfqo67w) I've dropped the claim about phase and value, but kept it for type. I've also explicitly spelled out how to determine the type, and added a note in the "Form semantics" section that points toward the justification for calling this _the_ type of the expression.

(if the phase is not "runtime") constant value. However, it does not have a
well-defined expression category.

#### Form conversions

An expression with a primitive form can be converted to another primitive form

> by applying type, category, and phase conversions independently. Form

Reviewer: I don't think these are independent. For example, to go from a value to initializing a `var` pattern requires that the type be copyable (or an implicit conversion exists between the source and destination types).

Author: Good point. How about this?

conversions can be applied to different elements of a composite form
independently.

> _Form composition_ converts a composite form to a primitive form as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Form composition_ converts a composite form with consistent category and phase to a primitive form as follows:
```

[`returned var` declarations](control_flow/return.md#returned-var). These
directly observe the storage provided for initialization of a function's return.

### Expression forms

We typically treat the category and type of an expression as independent
properties. However, in some cases we need deal with them as an integrated
whole. The _form_ of an expression captures all of the information about it that
is visible to the type system, while abstracting away all other information
about it. Thus, forms are a generalization of types: what we conventionally call
"types" are really the types of objects and values, whereas forms are the types
of expressions and patterns.

> A _primitive form_ consists of a type, an expression category, an expression

Reviewer 2: I think it'd be good to give readers just a tiny hint here that the set of stuff that comprises a form is expected to change over time as we discover more things that the type system cares about. (I think we'd be sad if someone built some critical dependency on a form being exactly a four-tuple of these things, or relied on form identity not taking anything else into account.) Something like this would probably be enough:
```suggestion
A _primitive form_ currently consists of a type, an expression category, an expression
```

the common case, we can treat each of those properties as independent. For
convenience, in this section we will use the notation `[T, C, P, V]` to
represent a primitive form with type `T`, category `C`, phase `P` and value `V`,
but this is not Carbon syntax.

Other forms are called _composite forms_, and there are two kinds:

A _tuple form_ can be thought of as a tuple of forms, just as a tuple type can
be thought of as a tuple of types. The form of a tuple literal is a tuple form,
whose elements are the forms of the literal elements.

> **TODO:** Extend this to support variadic forms.

A _struct form_ can be thought of as a struct whose fields are forms, just as a
struct type can be thought of as a struct whose fields are types. The form of a
struct literal is a struct form with the same field names, whose values are the
forms of the corresponding fields of the struct literal.

The _type component_ of a form is defined as follows:

-   The type component of a primitive form `[T, C, P, V]` is `T`.
-   The type component of a tuple form is a tuple of the type components of its
    elements.
-   The type component of a struct form is a struct of the type components of

>     its elements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   The type component of a struct form is a struct whose field names are the
    field names of the struct form and whose field types are the type components
    of the corresponding elements.
```

The type of an expression is the type component of the expression's form.

#### Form conversions

An expression with a primitive form can be converted to another primitive form
with the same type by applying a phase conversion followed by a category

> conversion. An expression with a primitive form can be converted to a primitive

Reviewer 2: What is a phase conversion? I don't think that's a concept that existed before. Do we want to model phase as something we can convert to, rather than something that is a measured / observed property of an expression? I think modeling that in the toolchain would introduce some complexity, but it might allow us to do interesting things where values and representations are changed by the conversion. But nonetheless this seems to me like a substantial design change that's separate from the introduction of forms.

Author: I intend "phase conversion" to refer to the process mentioned in the [expression phase documentation](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/tree/trunk/docs/design#expression-phases):

> Template constants convert to symbolic constants and to runtime values. Symbolic constants will generally convert into runtime values if an operation that inspects the value is performed on them. Runtime values will convert into template or symbolic constants if constant evaluation of the runtime expression succeeds.

    converted to a primitive form `[(T1, T2, ..., TN), C, P, (V1, V2, ... VN)]`.
-   A struct form
    `{.a = [Ta, C, P, Va], .b = [Tb, C, P, Vb], ... .z = [Tz, C, P, Vz]}` can be
    converted to a primitive form
    `[{.a = Ta, .b = Tb, ... .z = Tz}, C, P, {.a = Va, .b = Vb, ... .z = Vz}]`.

In both cases, `C` cannot be "reference", because an aggregate of references to
independent objects can't necessarily be replaced by a reference to a single
aggregate object.

_Form decomposition_ is the inverse of form composition. It converts a primitive
form to a composite form as follows:

-   A primitive form `[(T1, T2, ..., TN), C, P, V]` can be converted to a tuple
    form `([T1, C, P, V.1], [T2, C, P, V.2], ... [TN, C, P, V.(N)])`.
-   A primitive form `[{.a = Ta, .b = Tb, ... .z = Tz}, C, P, V]` can be
    converted to a struct form
    `{.a = [Ta, C, P, V.a], .b = [Tb, C, P, V.b], ... .z = [Tz, C, P, V.z]}`.

In both cases, if `C` is "initializing", the expression is first converted to an
ephemeral reference by materialization, because an initializer for a single
object of an aggregate type can't necessarily be used to initialize independent

> objects of the element types.

Reviewer 2: Do we really want this to be possible as a conversion? It seems surprising to me to allow this kind of thing. For example:
```carbon
let t: (i32, i32, i32) = (1, 2, 3);
let a: array(i32, 3) = t;
```
I would expect the initialization of `a` to be invalid: that you can initialize an array from a tuple form but not from a primitive form of tuple type. But if we allow form decomposition as an implicit conversion, then I guess the initialization of `a` would be valid? Similarly for initializing classes from an expression with struct form:
```carbon
class C { var a: i32; }
let init: {.a: i32} = {.a = 42};
let c: C = init;
```
Again I'd expect this to be invalid, but `let c: C = {.a = 42};` to be valid.

Author: As agreed on [06-26](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Yt-i5AmF76LSvD4TrWRIAE_92kii6j5yFiW-S7ahzlg/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.7cfn0ls9i1fl), I've kept these semantics, but reframed them as behaviors of the individual operations, rather than a general language-level implicit conversion.

In all of the above definitions, if `P` is runtime, the constant-value
components are omitted.

> **Note:** Form composition is always semantics-preserving, meaning that any
> language rule that treats primitive and composite forms as separate cases will
> nevertheless give the same result for the initial composite form as for the
> resulting primitive form. Similarly, form decomposition is
> semantics-preserving except when `C` is "initializing".

#### Form semantics

Almost all operations expect their expression operands to have a primitive form
with a particular expression category, and possibly a particular phase and/or

> type. Operands are converted to a suitable primitive form as follows:

Reviewer 2: The notion of "conversion to a form" doesn't really make sense to me. I think the destination for a conversion is something narrower -- generally just a type and a set of acceptable categories. But maybe I'm misreading this; is the intent:
```suggestion
type. Operands are converted to have a suitable primitive form as follows:
```
(That is, the operands are converted such that they have a suitable form, rather than the conversion process taking a form as input?)

Author: This is largely moot, but yes, the intent is that there is a set of suitable forms (defined by certain kinds of constraints), not a single target form.

> I think the destination for a conversion is something narrower -- generally just a type and a set of acceptable categories.

I think it's not uncommon to convert to a particular destination phase as well. For example, `let x: i32 = 0;` converts `0 as i32` from a concrete constant to a runtime value.

1. If the target expression category is "reference", or a type conversion will
   be applied in step 5 below, we treat the target expression category as
   "initializing".
2. The categories of all primitive sub-forms are converted to the target

>    category.

Reviewer 2: These two bullets together suggest that if we have an operand that is a reference expression of type T, and we want a reference expression of type T, then we'll make a copy? (Converting from a reference expression of type T to an initializing expression of type T would copy.)

3. The phases of all primitive sub-forms are converted to a single common phase:
   "runtime" if any of them are "runtime", or else "symbolic" if any of them are
   "symbolic", or else "template".
4. The operand is converted to a primitive form by form composition.
5. If the operand is expected to have a particular type, implicit type
   conversions are applied as needed. Note that this is the only step that can
   change the type component of the form.
6. If the target category was changed in step 1, the operand is converted to the
   original target category.
7. If the operand is expected to have a particular phase, it is converted to

>    that phase.

Reviewer 2: I'm not really convinced this is an operation that we want to exist. Specifically, consider what happens during class initialization from a struct form: we construct an object of class type by initializing each field from the corresponding element of the struct form. Likewise, array initialization from a tuple form initializes each element from the corresponding element of the tuple form. Consistently with that, we should define struct initialization from a struct form and tuple initialization from a tuple form in the same way, and if we do, then the operation described here doesn't need to exist -- converting a tuple form to a tuple value or initializer isn't a special case.

Author: In other words, you want this to be modeled as a type conversion (as it must be in the class-from-struct and array-from-tuple cases)? OK, I've done that. The need to "retry" that conversion in some cases feels awkward, but the underlying behavior is the same as what I had before.

As a side note, the sentence here about "even if the expression already has the expected type" and the passages I added to the tuple and struct docs are particularly notable examples of where it's potentially confusing to talk about an expression as having a type when it may not have a primitive form.

In some cases, such as when matching an
[unused binding pattern](pattern_matching.md#unused-bindings), the operand's
value is known to be unused. In those cases, the conversions described above may
not actually be performed in the generated code, but the Carbon code is still
typechecked as if they were.

A few operations expect operands that have composite forms:

-   A struct member access expression expects its first operand to have struct
    form. The form of the member access expression is given by the corresponding
    element of the struct form.
-   A tuple indexing expression expects its first operand to have tuple form.
    The form of the member access expression is given by the corresponding
    element of the tuple form.
-   A tuple or struct pattern expects its scrutinee to have tuple or struct form
    (respectively). In either case, the subpattern scrutinees are member access

>     expressions, and their forms are determined using the above rule.

Reviewer 2: As noted above, I'm not convinced we want tuple and struct expressions to convert to tuple and struct forms. If they don't, I think these operations don't expect their operands to have composite forms, but their behavior depends on the form of their operand.

represent a primitive form with type `T`, category `C`, phase `P` and value `V`,
but this is not Carbon syntax.

Other forms are called _composite forms_, and there are two kinds:

A _tuple form_ can be thought of as a tuple of forms, just as a tuple type can
be thought of as a tuple of types. The form of a tuple literal is a tuple form,
whose elements are the forms of the literal elements.

> **TODO:** Extend this to support variadic forms.

A _struct form_ can be thought of as a struct whose fields are forms, just as a
struct type can be thought of as a struct whose fields are types. The form of a
struct literal is a struct form with the same field names, whose values are the
forms of the corresponding fields of the struct literal.

The _type component_ of a form is defined as follows:

-   The type component of a primitive form `[T, C, P, V]` is `T`.
-   The type component of a tuple form is a tuple of the type components of its
    elements.
-   The type component of a struct form is a struct whose field names are the
    field names of the struct form and whose field types are the type components
    of the corresponding elements.

> The type of an expression is the type component of the expression's form.

Author: @zygoloid @chandlerc in the [06-26 open discussion](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Yt-i5AmF76LSvD4TrWRIAE_92kii6j5yFiW-S7ahzlg/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.7cfn0ls9i1fl), IIUC you argued that we shouldn't understand this as being _the_ type of the expression, but rather the _default_ type, which might or might not be used depending on the context. In light of that, I think we should use the term "default type" instead of "type component", drop this last sentence, and rewrite places that talk about "the type of an expression" to talk about "the default type of the expression's form" instead. Do you concur?

See my response [here](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5545/files#r2167863036) for a couple examples of where that change might be clarifying.

Reviewer 2: (The second link in your comment doesn't work for me.)

I'm comfortable with saying that the type component of the expression is "the type of the expression" in general -- for example, when performing name lookup into an expression, that's the type I think we should be using, and likewise for type deduction and so on. I think it's a bit weirder than for a primitive form, because (essentially, by definition) a composite form isn't evaluated as a single "chunk" to produce a single thing -- it's an expression with multiple components that are much more independent of each other -- so at runtime there isn't a "result" of a composite form that you can think about the type of, but in terms of classifying the expression with a type as part of its static properties I think it's fine. But... if it's going to make our exposition clearer to use a different term such as "default type", and reserve "type" only for the cases where evaluation of the expression will result in an object or reference or value of the given type, I'm OK with that too, but I'd be a bit sad to lose the property that every expression has a type. (That sounds like we'd be getting a bit closer to the status of *braced-init-list*s in C++, which are considered non-expressions, effectively because of their non-primitive form.)

Author: Sorry, the second link was supposed to go [here](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/5545/files/3ef17eed91d8dd021aefa52fd12baf4ab4adbcc3#r2175656035), but looking at this afresh, I don't know why I thought this terminology shift would be helpful in the places I pointed out. Like you, I would be sad to lose the property that every expression has a type, so if you're OK with keeping this sentence, I am too.

type "_expression_ `as type`".

-   _expression-return-form_ ::= _expression_

An expression with no _category-tag_ is equivalent to "`var` _expression_".

-   _proper-return-form_ ::= `(` [_expression-return-form_ `,`]\* _proper-return-form_
    [`,` _nesting-return-form_]\* `,`? `)`

A tuple literal of return forms denotes a tuple form whose sub-forms are
specified by the comma-separated elements. To avoid formal ambiguity, this
grammar rule requires at least one of the sub-forms to be proper.

-   _expression-field-form_ ::= _designator_ `:` _expression-return-form_
-   _proper-field-form_ ::= _designator_ `:` _proper-return-form_
-   _field-form_ ::= _field-decl_
-   _field-form_ ::= _proper-field-form_
-   _proper-return-form_ ::= `{` [_expression-field-form_ `,`]\* _proper-field-form_
    [`,` _field-form_]\* `}`

A struct literal of return forms denotes a struct form whose field names and
their forms are specified by the comma-separated field forms. To avoid formal
ambiguity, this grammar rule requires at least one of the field forms to be
proper.

> **Open question:** Should there be a way to specify symbolic or template phase

> > in return forms?

Reviewer: You can leave this question here, but it seems a bit out of scope for this proposal, and instead the domain of a compile-time evaluation proposal.

Author: Yeah, I agree it's out of scope for this proposal, it's just a natural issue to flag at this point in this document.

    field names of the struct form and whose field types are the type components
    of the corresponding elements.

The _category component_ and _phase component_ of a form are defined likewise.
The category component of a struct form is called a _struct category_, and the
category component of a tuple form is called a tuple category.

The type of an expression is the type component of the expression's form.

An _outcome_ is the result of evaluating an expression. It can be defined
recursively in terms of the expression's form:

-   The outcome of an initializing expression is an initializing outcome.
-   The outcome of a value expression is a value.
-   The outcome of a reference expression is a reference of the same kind.
-   The outcome of an expression with tuple form is a tuple of outcomes.
-   The outcome of an expression with struct form is a struct of outcomes.

An expression and its outcome always have the same form.

> ### Form literals

Reviewer: Again, these are return forms, not general form literals

Other forms are called _composite forms_, and there are two kinds:

A _tuple form_ can be thought of as a tuple of forms, just as a tuple type can
be thought of as a tuple of types. The form of a tuple literal is a tuple form,
whose elements are the forms of the literal elements.

> **TODO:** Extend this to support variadic forms.

A _struct form_ can be thought of as a struct whose fields are forms, just as a
struct type can be thought of as a struct whose fields are types. The form of a
struct literal is a struct form with the same field names, whose values are the
forms of the corresponding fields of the struct literal.

The _type component_ of a form is defined as follows:

-   The type component of a primitive form `[T, C, P, V]` is `T`.
-   The type component of a tuple form is a tuple of the type components of its
    elements.
-   The type component of a struct form is a struct whose field names are the
    field names of the struct form and whose field types are the type components
    of the corresponding elements.

The _category component_ and _phase component_ of a form are defined likewise.
The category component of a struct form is called a _struct category_, and the

> category component of a tuple form is called a tuple category.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
category component of a tuple form is called a _tuple category_.
```

The type of an expression is the type component of the expression's form.

An _outcome_ is the result of evaluating an expression. It can be defined
recursively in terms of the expression's form:

> -   The outcome of an initializing expression is an initializing outcome.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   The outcome of an initializing expression is an [initializing outcome](#initializing-outcomes).
```
I wonder if we can reorder these sections so that the initializing outcome section is after this one. I think that might help people reading this document linearly.

Author: I seriously considered that, and ironically the main reason I didn't do it was concern about linear reading order: I wanted to avoid using the term before defining it. Nevertheless, I agree that putting it below here is more logical, and the disruption to linear reading is probably minimal since the definition follows the use pretty closely, so I've done that.

A conversion between forms can be broken down into up to three steps: type
conversion, category conversion, and phase conversion. These convert the form to
a particular target type, category, and phase component (respectively). These
steps aren't fully orthogonal: type conversions can change the category and
phase components as a byproduct, and category conversions can change the phase
component. However, category conversions can't change the type component, and
phase conversions can't change either of the other two, so converting the type,
then category, then phase, ensures that we converge on the desired result.

Any of these steps may be omitted, depending on whether the context imposes
requirements on the corresponding component. Most commonly, an operand position
requires its operand to have a primitive form with a particular category,
usually with a particular type, and sometimes with a particular phase.

In some cases an expression's outcome is _discarded_, such as when the
expression is used as a statement, or is matched with an
[unused binding pattern](pattern_matching.md#unused-bindings). Discarding an
outcome is a form conversion that does nothing except materialize any

> initializing sub-outcomes, in order to satisfy the requirement that every

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
initializing sub-outcomes, in order to satisfy the obligation that every
```
to more directly call back to the way this was described earlier, maybe?

> initializing outcome is materialized.

Reviewer 2: For a case like
```carbon
fn F() -> SomeType;
var x: (SomeType, SomeType) = (F(), F());
```
... we don't materialize the initializing outcome of the calls to `F()`, because they're initializing subobjects of some larger object.

Perhaps we could say:

```suggestion
initializing outcome is used to initialize an object.
```

I wonder if it's worth mentioning this in the "Initializing outcomes" section -- the "delegating the responsibility" option is sort of what's happening here, but it might be clearer to list a third way of satisfying the obligation to provide storage via the initialization of a subobject.

Author: I see this as an example of the first way, but that wasn't clear because I referred to that as "materialization", even though I intended it to also encompass initializing non-temporary storage. I've tried to clarify that above.

Phase conversions are straightforward, because they cannot change the form
structure; they can only apply primitive phase conversions to primitive
sub-forms. Type and category conversions are more complex, and are covered in

> the next two sections.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Phase conversions cannot change the form
structure; they can only apply primitive phase conversions to primitive
sub-forms. Type and category conversions are more complex, and are covered in
the next two sections.
```

I think there's a reasonable chance that we'll want phase conversions to do exciting things like heap promotion, or to use a different representation for runtime versus compile-time values, so I fear "straightforward" may be over-promising :-)

See [here](expressions/implicit_conversions.md) for overall information about
type conversions. Conversions involving struct, tuple, and array types are
described here because of their unique interactions with expression forms.

> **TODO:** A forthcoming proposal is expected to update the type conversion
> interfaces to permit user-defined conversions to depend on the form of the
> input, and customize the form of the output. Once that is done, these "built
> in" conversions should be presented as implementations of those interfaces,
> possibly with some "magic" for things like introspecting on struct field
> names.

Each of the conversions described in this section is explicit if and only if it
invokes another explicit type conversion. Otherwise, it is implicit.

An outcome `source` that has a struct type can be converted to a struct type
`Dest` if they have the same set of field names:

-   If the type of `source` is `Dest`, return `source`.
-   If `source` is a struct outcome, for each field name `F` in `Dest`, in
    `Dest`'s field order, type-convert `source.F` to `Dest.F`. Return a struct
    outcome where each field `F` is set to the outcome of the corresponding

>     conversion.

Reviewer 2: The toolchain produces a primitive form in this case. Does the difference matter?

Author: I think it matters in cases like this:

```
var global: i32;
fn F() -> {var .x: i64, ref .y: i32} {
  let local: i32 = 0;
  return {.x = local, .y = global};
}
```

There's no way to make this work correctly if the conversion to `{.x: i64, .y: i32}` has a primitive form, except to specify the semantics of `return` such that there is no conversion at the whole-struct level. We could do that, maybe by modeling `return` as a kind of pattern matching. At the moment I don't see any other cases where this would matter, so that might be sufficient to let this conversion produce a primitive form.

But we could also go in the other direction, and say that type conversion always happens before we recurse into sub-forms, even in pattern matching. That would arguably be more consistent with user-defined struct pattern matching, which seems like it will have to work by converting the scrutinee to the struct pattern's expected type.

I've tried to keep the design flexible and avoid prejudging those kinds of questions, by preserving the form structure as much as possible throughout.

Reviewer 2: OK, that makes sense.

I think this means that struct initialization in the toolchain will produce an intermediate `struct_literal` in some cases (after type conversion and before form conversion), which will take us from building two instructions with O(n) fields per struct initialization from a literal to building three, which is a little unfortunate, but we can probably optimize the extra one away with a little effort.

-   If `source` is a primitive outcome, convert it to a struct outcome by
    [form decomposition](#category-conversions), type-convert the outcome to
    `Dest`, category-convert the outcome to an initializing expression, and

>     return the result.

Reviewer 2: I think we want to both type- and category-convert the individual elements here, in sequence, and then perform form composition, rather than type-converting the whole struct outcome and then category-converting it. Given:
```carbon
var x: {a: A, b: B};
var y: {a: C, b: D} = x;
```
... where the A->C conversion produces a value expression, and the B->D conversion produces a value expression, I think we want:

1. Convert `x.a` to C
2. Copy the C into `y.a`
3. Convert `x.b` to D
4. Copy the D into `y.b`

If we first type-convert the struct outcome, and then category-convert the result, we'll swap the order of 2 and 3.

Author: What are the advantages of doing it that way?

My concern is it would have the effect of making struct types somewhat more "special", because if `x` had a class type with `A` and `B` fields and an implicit conversion to `{a: C, b: D}`, I don't think we have any choice but to swap the order of 2 and 3 (unless we change direction on #5389, and have conversion interfaces take the output form as a parameter, rather than just the output type). It would also somewhat complicate the description here, because struct types would have to be exceptions to the general rule that a form conversion consists of a type conversion, then a category conversion, then a phase conversion.

Those drawbacks would be particularly concerning if we want tuples to work the same way, because while structs are unavoidably "special" to some extent, we have had aspirations to eventually make tuples into class types. Making this ordering change for tuples seems like it would rule out the possibility of defining tuple conversions as ordinary library impls of the prelude type conversion interfaces.

Reviewer 2: > What are the advantages of doing it that way?

We've generally said that we want struct field initialization to proceed in field order to the extent that it can, which to me means we want to do 2 before 3. That's also the order that minimizes register pressure, which might be important: in C++, braced initializers can get very large. In general I think we want initialization to put values into memory as early as it can, in order to minimize the amount of state that needs to be retained and copied at the end of the initialization process.

Also, if we order all type conversion before any form conversion then:
```carbon
var y: {.a: C, .b: D} = {.a = MakeA(), .b = MakeB()};
```
... would presumably execute in three phases (assuming the conversions produce reference or value expressions):

1. `MakeA()`.
2. `MakeB()`.
3. Convert `A` -> `C`.
4. Convert `B` -> `D`.
5. Copy `C`.
6. Copy `D`.

Having two phases of struct conversion was already pretty surprising; having three feels even more so to me.

If we rewrote that example as:
```carbon
let {var a: C, var b: D} = {.a = MakeA(), .b = MakeB()};
```
... then I think we would reorder the steps to 3, 5, 4, 6, which also seems surprising to me.

Having said that, the model of separating type conversion from form conversion is more elegant and seems potentially easier to explain. And we can't escape some amount of weird ordering due to the behavior of initializing expressions, which perform their final store very early (in either the first or second phase, depending on whether a type conversion is needed), and due to struct field reordering just generally messing things up.

This wouldn't be convenient for the toolchain, but maybe we can describe the process as type conversion then form conversion, but then *schedule* the component operations in left-to-right order to the extent possible.

Maybe worth a leads issue to decide on this? The choice seems non-obvious to me.

Author: OK, I've filed this as leads issue #6456.

Author: I've now revised this to reflect the tentative consensus in #6456.

Note that the sub-conversions invoked here are not necessarily defined; if so,
the conversion itself is not defined.

The conversion to an initializing outcome in the last case is not formally
necessary; its purpose is to ensure that the result of type conversion is not
"less primitive" than the source form. Allowing conversions to add form
structure that wasn't originally present would have surprising consequences. For
example, if we have `fn F() -> (i32, i32)`, then `var a: array(i32, 2) = F();`
is not valid because `F()` does not have a tuple form. That being the case, it
would be surprising if `var a: array(i32, 2) = F() as (i16, i16);` were valid,
so `F() as (i16, i16)` must not have a tuple form.

**Open question:** We've chosen "initializing" as the default category for
primitive sub-forms in a conversion, but in some cases "value" could be more
efficient. Do we want a way of explicitly requesting conversion to a given form,
rather than just a given type, in order to override this default when it's

> inefficient?

Reviewer 2: The toolchain takes the destination form as an input to the conversion process, and produces an initializing form for the struct conversion if the destination is initializing, and a value form otherwise. (And similarly for tuple conversion and struct-to-class conversion.) I think that's likely to be important to avoid copies, eg:
```carbon
let a: {x: X, y: Y} = ...
let b: {y: Y, x: X) = a;
```
... shouldn't make copies of the `X` and `Y` in order to construct a temporary `{y: Y, x: X}` object, only to then acquire its value. Instead we should go straight to a value expression here I think.

I think we may also have cases where we want to *request* a composite form as the output of type conversion -- specifically, when performing a conversion as part of pattern matching, when matching a struct or tuple pattern, we may want a corresponding composite form even if the input didn't have one. For example:
```carbon
var a: {x: X, y: Y};
let {y = var y: Y, x = x: X} = a;
```
I think it'd be a surprise if we category-converted to either initializing or value category after we perform form decomposition here -- ideally I think that would behave the same as:
```carbon
var y: Y = a.y;
let x: X = a.x;
```

Author: As above, although I think this is feasible, it seems somewhat inconsistent with the current direction of #5389 (where the target form is not an input to the type conversion API), and if applied to tuples as well it could restrict our ability to make them into ordinary library types.

I agree with your interpretation of the first example (including agreeing that it's not good), but I don't think the second one is a problem, because a struct pattern doesn't perform any conversions on its scrutinee; it just checks that the scrutinee has the right set of field names and then delegates to its subpatterns (the same goes for tuple, except it checks arity rather than field names). The subpatterns may of course convert their respective subscrutinees, but that's fine, because the default-to-initializing behavior only happens when flattening to a primitive form.

(I assume that eventually we'll want struct and tuple patterns to perform conversions on the scrutinee, so that user-defined types can match them, but I think we have good options for making that work without incurring an "eager" type conversion in examples like yours.)

Author: In light of the consensus reached in the [11-18 open discussion](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Yt-i5AmF76LSvD4TrWRIAE_92kii6j5yFiW-S7ahzlg/edit?tab=t.1ji9ixn9bbnn#heading=h.g0rwpuhyr6jt), I've dropped the forced conversion to a primitive form (and correspondingly changed the form conversion rules to allow implicit form decomposition). So now your first example type-convert to `{.y: Y, .x: X}` by recursively type-converting the elements, which gives us `{.y: form(var Y), .x: form(var X)}`. We then category-convert to `form(val {.y: Y, .x: X})` by materializing and acquiring the elements and then applying form composition. I don't know if I'd describe that as going "straight to a value expression", but I think it's optimal.

There is a conversion to a class type `Dest` from an outcome `source` that has a
struct type, if there is a conversion from `source` to a struct type that has
the same field names as `Dest`, with the same types, in the same order. The
conversion type-converts `source` to that struct type, category-converts that to
an initializing expression of the struct type, and then reinterprets it as an
initializing expression of `Dest` (which is layout-compatible with the struct

> type by construction).

Reviewer 2: Is it worth saying something about `.base` here?

Or, do we define the object representation struct for a class type somewhere? Maybe we could say there is a conversion to a class type if there's a conversion to its object representation?

Author: It doesn't look like we define "object representation", so I've added a brief mention of `.base`.

conversions, and happens in the source expression's lexical order, so the fields
of an object are not necessarily initialized in declaration order.

Conversions between tuple types are defined in the same way, treating tuples as
structs that have fields named `.0`, `.1`, etc, in numerical order.

There is a conversion to `array(T, N)` from any expression with a tuple form of
exactly `N` elements, whose type components are convertible to `T`. The
conversion is an initializing expression, which type-converts each source
element to `T`, and initializes the corresponding array element from the result
of that conversion.

#### Category conversions

_Form composition_ converts a composite form with consistent category to a
primitive form as follows (where `min` as applied to phases uses the ordering
"runtime" < "symbolic" < "template"):

-   A tuple form `([T1, C, P1, V1], [T2, C, P2, V2], ... [TN, C, PN, VN])` can
    be converted to a primitive form
    `[(T1, T2, ..., TN), C, min(P1, P2, ..., PN), (V1, V2, ... VN)]`.
-   A struct form
    `{.a = [Ta, C, Pa, Va], .b = [Tb, C, Pb, Vb], ... .z = [Tz, C, Pz, Vz]}` can
    be converted to a primitive form

>     `[{.a = Ta, .b = Tb, ... .z = Tz}, C, min(Pa, Pb, ... Pz), {.a = Va, .b = Vb, ... .z = Vz}]`.

Reviewer 2: This would be a little clearer to me if we talked about converting an expression of composite form to a primitive form, rather than talking about converting the form itself.

```suggestion
_Form composition_ converts an expression of composite form with consistent category to a
primitive form as follows (where `min` as applied to phases uses the ordering
"runtime" < "symbolic" < "template"):

-   An expression of tuple form `([T1, C, P1, V1], [T2, C, P2, V2], ... [TN, C, PN, VN])` can
    be converted to a primitive form
    `[(T1, T2, ..., TN), C, min(P1, P2, ..., PN), (V1, V2, ... VN)]`.
-   An expression of struct form
    `{.a = [Ta, C, Pa, Va], .b = [Tb, C, Pb, Vb], ... .z = [Tz, C, Pz, Vz]}` can
    be converted to a primitive form
    `[{.a = Ta, .b = Tb, ... .z = Tz}, C, min(Pa, Pb, ... Pz), {.a = Va, .b = Vb, ... .z = Vz}]`.
```

... with the idea being that this conversion takes the expression and the target form as input, and produces an expression as output. Does that work for you?

Author: Yeah, that works. I've applied your suggestion and tried to make the same change elsewhere, but let me know if I missed any.

    form of the same arity. Category-convert each source sub-form to the
    corresponding target sub-category.
-   If the target category component is a struct, the source form must be a
    struct form with the same set of field names in the same order.
    Category-convert each source sub-form to the corresponding target
    sub-category.
-   If the target category is a primitive category `C`:
    -   If the source form is primitive, convert to `C` by applying primitive
        category conversions.
    -   If the source form is composite and `C` is a reference category,
        category-convert the source form to "initializing", and then convert the
        result to `C` by applying primitive category conversions.
    -   If the source form is composite and `C` is not a reference category,
        category-convert each source sub-form to `C`, and then convert the
        aggregate result of these conversions to `C` by form composition.

_Form decomposition_ is the inverse of form composition. It converts a primitive
form to a composite form as follows:

-   A primitive form `[(T1, T2, ..., TN), C, P, V]` can be converted to a tuple

>     form `([T1, CC, P, V.1], [T2, CC, P, V.2], ... [TN, CC, P, V.(N)])`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    form `([T1, CC, P, V.0], [T2, CC, P, V.1], ... [TN, CC, P, V.(N-1)])`.
```

[`returned var` declarations](control_flow/return.md#returned-var). These
directly observe the storage provided for initialization of a function's return.

## Expression forms

We typically treat the category and type of an expression as independent

> properties. However, in some cases we need deal with them as an integrated

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
properties. However, in some cases we need to deal with them as an integrated
```

whole. The _form_ of an expression captures all of the information about it that
is visible to the type system, while abstracting away all other information
about it. Thus, forms are a generalization of types: what we conventionally call
"types" are really the types of objects and values, whereas forms are the types
of expressions and patterns.

A _primitive form_ currently consists of a type, an expression category, an
expression phase, and optionally a constant value (which is present if and only
if the expression phase is not "runtime"). When dealing with primitive forms,
which is the common case, we can treat each of those properties as independent.

> For convenience, in this section we will use the notation `[T, C, P, V]` to

Reviewer 4: Minor, but I'd prefer `<T, C, P, V>` or a unicode character for the not-actually-Carbon notations here, mostly to make them unambiguously distinct from any Carbon syntaxes.

Author: OK, done. I went with `<>` because there aren't that many unicode brackets that consistently render well, and variadics already grabbed several of them.

be thought of as a tuple of types. The form of a tuple literal is a tuple form,
whose elements are the forms of the literal elements.

> **TODO:** Extend this to support variadic forms.

A _struct form_ can be thought of as a struct whose fields are forms, just as a
struct type can be thought of as a struct whose fields are types. The form of a
struct literal is a struct form with the same field names, whose values are the
forms of the corresponding fields of the struct literal.

The _type component_ of a form is defined as follows:

-   The type component of a primitive form `[T, C, P, V]` is `T`.
-   The type component of a tuple form is a tuple of the type components of its
    elements.
-   The type component of a struct form is a struct whose field names are the
    field names of the struct form and whose field types are the type components
    of the corresponding elements.

The _category component_ and _phase component_ of a form are defined likewise.
The category component of a struct form is called a _struct category_, and the
category component of a tuple form is called a _tuple category_.

The type of an expression is the type component of the expression's form.

> An _outcome_ is the result of evaluating an expression. It can be defined

Reviewer 4: This is the other term that isn't quite landing perfectly for me... I don't think it's blocking, but something I'd love for us to find better terminology for...

Personally, I'd love it if we could make this definitionally the "result" -- but I'm guessing that doesn't work for some reason?

Author: The main drawback I see with "result" is that it's a more commonly-used word in this context, so it will be harder to tell whether it's being used colloquially or as a term of art in any particular case. By the same token it also collides more with other more technical uses, e.g. Rust's `Result<T, E>`. Those are far from fatal problems, though, so I'm happy to go with "result" if the leads prefer.

Reviewer 4: Chatting with Richard, I think we're both fine using "result" here.

C++ apparently already uses "result" as a special term of art for the same thing, and so I think the consistency is actually good and helps us a bit. In Carbon, we have a more rich taxonomy -- results aren't just values, they can be tuples, structs, etc. And they can be "initializing results" that have special properties.

That work for you?

Author: Sure, that works for me. Done.

recursively in terms of the expression's form:

-   The outcome of an initializing expression is an
    [initializing outcome](#initializing-outcomes).
-   The outcome of a value expression is a value.
-   The outcome of a reference expression is a reference of the same kind.
-   The outcome of an expression with tuple form is a tuple of outcomes.
-   The outcome of an expression with struct form is a struct of outcomes.

An expression and its outcome always have the same form.

### Initializing outcomes

An _initializing outcome_ is the notional result of evaluating an initializing
expression, and represents an obligation to provide storage for an object of the
expression's type. This obligation can be fulfilled directly by providing
suitable storage (as with temporary materialization, for example), or it can be
delegated by returning it to some enclosing context, where it acts as an

> initializing expression.

Reviewer 4: I somewhat understand what this is trying to say, but I don't think the wording here is working well for me...

The idea that evaluating the initializing expression produces an _obligation_ is really hard to reason about even though I understand what it's trying to express -- the dynamic evaluation can't occur until the obligation is satisfied, so how can its _result_ be the thing that produces the obligation?

Again, my concern here isn't at all about the proposed semantic model, but about the way we are explaining it and the terminology used in the process.

That said, this is also a very small aspect of the design and not really that critical to the proposal itself, so maybe it makes sense to just add a TODO to revisit how we articulate this aspect of the design to try and come up with an explanation that doesn't have the weird effect-cause inversion?

Author: Yeah, I'm not very happy with this explanation either, so I've added a TODO. I think some kind of "weird inversion" may be unavoidable, because it's inherent in the design of initializing expressions, but no doubt we can find clearer ways of talking about it.

Reviewer 4: As I was discussing the "result" question above with Richard, he brought up that we could just pivot this to be more direct about expression _evaluation_ taking an input for initializing expressions (I would call it the "result location") so that the evaluation produces a "result object" in that location (as opposed to other evaluations that produce other kinds of results). This also is fairly consistent with C++'s terminology, and would use "result object" for the same thing it does.

Somewhat fundamentally, he pointed out that we have to have one of two confusing things: Either
- we have expression evaluation not strictly "produce" things, and in some cases take an input, or
- we have a strange a-temporal model where evaluation produces an obligation that must be fulfilled prior to doing the evaluation.

I think ultimately, I prefer biting the bullet and explaining this as evaluation taking an input, and keeping the temporal description simpler. It still means we have to talk about why type checking lets us know the exact shape of that input ahead of time, but that seems simpler.

(@zygoloid - correct me if I misrepresented any of this?)

Author: In this model, how would we phrase a passage like this one? https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/blob/cf642ae74a2c789f5825d80a6230e1d5ae454a85/docs/design/pattern_matching.md?plain=1#L345-L348

Keep in mind that there might or might not be `var` patterns arbitrarily deeply nested inside the tuple pattern, there might or might not be initializing expressions arbitrarily deeply nested inside the scrutinee form (which might or might not line up with the `var` patterns), and the scrutinee sub-forms might or might not correspond to sub-expressions that can be evaluated independently. So when describing how a tuple pattern matches, we don't really have enough information to say what output parameters the scrutinee evaluation will take, or what result locations will be passed for them, or even whether the scrutinee is evaluated up front or interleaved with pattern matching. Initializing outcomes/results let us abstract all that away. That not only makes the wording more concise, it gives us progressive disclosure: you don't need to be aware of the temporal weirdness of initializing outcomes in order to read the pattern matching docs and understand how it works for values and references (and, for most purposes, initializing expressions).

The best alternative I've come up with is to explicitly describe pattern matching (and expression evaluation?) in terms of building up a DAG of operations at compile time, each of which has particular execution semantics at run-time (very much like SemIR). Explicitly distinguishing the two temporalities will probably be less confusing, but substantially more verbose, and it means we lose the progressive disclosure.

Reviewer 4: We discussed this in the open discussion and have a path forward here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Yt-i5AmF76LSvD4TrWRIAE_92kii6j5yFiW-S7ahzlg/edit?tab=t.rqzlfn8r9nep#heading=h.y2sjogske4tx

Author: OK, how's this?

Reviewer 4: Yeah, I like this explanation. Thanks for all the work to figure out how to articulate this.

Evaluating an expression produces a _result_. It can be defined recursively in
terms of the expression's form:

-   The result of an initializing expression is an
    [initializing result](#initializing-results).
-   The result of a value expression is a value.
-   The result of a reference expression is a reference of the same kind.
-   The result of an expression with tuple form is a tuple of results.
-   The result of an expression with struct form is a struct of results.

An expression and its result always have the same form.

The code that accesses the result of an expression is said to _consume_ that
result, and every primitive-form result is consumed exactly once (except in
certain narrow contexts where the result is known not to be initializing). If a
result isn't explicitly accessed, such as when the expression is used as a
statement, or is matched with an
[unused binding pattern](pattern_matching.md#unused-bindings), it is said to be
_discarded_, which consumes it in the absence of an explicit consumer.
Discarding an initializing result materializes and then immediately destroys it.
Discarding an entire ephemeral reference destroys the object it refers to.

> Discarding a value or any other kind of reference is a no-op.

Author: Note the small drive-by fix here, to say that discarding an entire ephemeral reference destroys it.

Reviewer 4: LG

    [form decomposition](#category-conversions), type-convert the outcome to
    `Dest`, category-convert the outcome to an initializing expression, and
    return the result.

Note that the sub-conversions invoked here are not necessarily defined; if so,
the conversion itself is not defined.

The conversion to an initializing outcome in the last case is not formally
necessary; its purpose is to ensure that the result of type conversion is not
"less primitive" than the source form. Allowing conversions to add form
structure that wasn't originally present would have surprising consequences. For
example, if we have `fn F() -> (i32, i32)`, then `var a: array(i32, 2) = F();`
is not valid because `F()` does not have a tuple form. That being the case, it
would be surprising if `var a: array(i32, 2) = F() as (i16, i16);` were valid,
so `F() as (i16, i16)` must not have a tuple form.

**Open question:** We've chosen "initializing" as the default category for
primitive sub-forms in a conversion, but in some cases "value" could be more
efficient. Do we want a way of explicitly requesting conversion to a given form,
rather than just a given type, in order to override this default when it's

> inefficient?

Reviewer: Won't this be determined by the form of the result of the implicit conversion, once that is under control of the impl?

Author: No, because that would lead to the "surprising consequences" discussed in the previous paragraph.

an initializing expression of the struct type, and then reinterprets it as an
initializing expression of `Dest` (which is layout-compatible with the struct
type by construction).

Note that some fields of an object may be initialized directly by the evaluation
of the source expression, while others may be initialized by the conversions
described here. The conversions initialize fields in their declaration order,
but the evaluation of the source expression always happens before any of the
conversions, and happens in the source expression's lexical order, so the fields
of an object are not necessarily initialized in declaration order.

Conversions between tuple types are defined in the same way, treating tuples as
structs that have fields named `.0`, `.1`, etc, in numerical order.

There is a conversion to `array(T, N)` from any expression with a tuple form of
exactly `N` elements, whose type components are convertible to `T`. The
conversion is an initializing expression, which type-converts each source
element to `T`, and initializes the corresponding array element from the result
of that conversion.

#### Category conversions

> _Form composition_ converts a composite form with consistent category and phase

Reviewer: Seems like it you are defining it for consistent category, but phase is allowed to be inconsistent?
```suggestion
_Form composition_ converts a composite form with consistent category
```

An expression and its result always have the same form.

The code that accesses the result of an expression is said to _consume_ that
result, and every result is consumed exactly once (except in certain narrow
contexts where the result is known not to have any initializing sub-results). If
the expression's result isn't explicitly accessed, such as when the expression
is used as a statement, or is matched with an
[unused binding pattern](pattern_matching.md#unused-bindings), it is said to be
_discarded_. Discarding consumes a result by materializing any initializing
sub-results, and then immediately destroying them.

> ### Initializing results

Reviewer 4: (temporary pending comment)

Author: Did you mean to send this? I'm not sure what it means.

Reviewer 4: (no, sorry)

statement inside `C.Make`. Finally, that `return` statement initializes the
result location (which is still the location of `c`'s storage) by
[direct initialization](#direct-initialization) from the value expression
`{.i = 0}`.

Notice that the implicit storage parameter propagates "backwards", into an
expression from the code that uses its result. In order to simplify the
description of the language, we usually won't explicitly discuss the result
locations of initializing expressions, or how they're propagated. Instead, this
propagation is encapsulated inside the _initializing result_, which is the
notional result of an initializing expression.

Whenever an initializing result is consumed, that implicitly means that the
consumer passes a result location into the evaluation of the initializing
expression. The source of that location depends on the consumer:

-   If the consumer is a temporary materialization conversion, the result
    location is newly-allocated temporary storage (which the consumer may
    subsequently lifetime-extend to durable storage).
-   If the consumer is a struct or tuple literal, the result location is
    propagated from the literal's consumer.

> -   If the consumer is a `return` statement, and the initializing result
>     corresponds to an initializing sub-form of the function's return form, the
>     result location is the implicit output parameter corresponding to that
>     initializing sub-form.

Reviewer 4: I think here you can be more general by explaining this in terms of one initializing expression consuming another, and maybe that's even a bit simpler?

```suggestion
-   If the consumer is itself an initializing expression (for example, an expression in a `return` statement where the initializing result
    corresponds to an initializing sub-form of the function's return form), the
    result location of the consuming initializing expression is forwarded to the consumed one.
```

Author: In practice I think that would create more problems than it solves. For example, given this code:

```
fn F() -> i32;
fn G() -> (ref i32, var i32) {
  ...
  return (some_ref, F());
}
```

It's really hard to point to an initializing expression that consumes `F()`. We could say it's the tuple literal, but that's just passing the buck (in fact, I think it's clearer to define consumption as applying to primitive results, and drop the tuple case from this list, so I've done that). It's not the `return`, because `return` isn't an expression. It's not `var i32` because it's debatable at best whether that's an expression, and if it is, it's a value expression. I don't think it's the result location parameter, because we haven't really given that an expression category, and if we did it certainly wouldn't be initializing. We could maybe say it's a `G()` callsite, but that's still not quite right because `G()` isn't an initializing expression, and it's confusing because the callsite isn't visible in the example, and it invites the question of _which_ callsite is the consumer of `F()`.

I have some ideas for how we could generalize this statement while avoiding those problems, but it'd require more work than just rephrasing this one sentence, and it seems premature given that as far as I know, temporary materialization and `return` statements are the only places in the language (existing or planned) where initializing results are consumed. Note in particular that `var` patterns expect the scrutinee to be an entire ephemeral reference, not an initializing result, so they're covered by the first bullet.

Each of the conversions described in this section is explicit if and only if it
invokes another explicit type conversion. Otherwise, it is implicit.

A type conversion of a primitive-form expression to a

> [compatible types](generics/terminology.md#compatible-types) just re-interprets

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[compatible type](generics/terminology.md#compatible-types) just re-interprets
```

> the expressions outcome with a new type, so it requires no run-time work, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the expression's outcome with a new type, so it requires no run-time work, and
```

    outcome where each field `F` is set to the outcome of the corresponding
    conversion.
-   If `source` is a primitive outcome, convert it to a struct outcome by
    [form decomposition](#category-conversions), and then type-convert the

>     outcome to `Dest` and return the result.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure how pedantic we want to be with terminology here, but I think formally we want to talk about converting expressions, not outcomes. Outcomes don't exist until the expression is evaluated, so an operation performed on an outcome can't fail and produce a compile-time diagnostic (because the operation happens later than that).

```suggestion
An expression `source` that has a struct type can be converted to a struct type
`Dest` if they have the same set of field names:

-   If the type of `source` is `Dest`, return `source`.
-   If `source` has a struct category, for each field name `F` in `Dest`, in
    `Dest`'s field order, type-convert `source.F` to `Dest.F`. The converted
    expression produces a struct outcome where each field `F` is set to the
    outcome of the corresponding conversion.
-   If `source` has a primitive category, convert it to a struct category by
    [form decomposition](#category-conversions), and then type-convert the
    resulting expression to `Dest`.
```

But maybe this level of pedantry is too much. It's certainly more convenient to blur the lines between compile-time and runtime concerns.

What do you think? Should we try to separate discussions of operations on outcomes (that happen when an expression is evaluated) from discussions of operations on expressions (that happen when an expression is formed and type-checked)?

I'm also happy with the answer being that we leave things as-is in this proposal and consider this question separately.

Author: Do you think the existing phrasing could cause problems for readers? If not, I'm inclined to leave it as-is, because as you say, it's more convenient. I don't feel too strongly about it, though.

Reviewer 2: I think it's at least fine to leave it as-is for this PR. No need to add extra complexity here; we're already doing a lot in this PR.
